# Blockchain-based Self-Sovereign Identity Systems: Opportunities and Challenges

<ins>**Academic Insight**</ins>

```{admonition} Key Insights
:class: tip
- Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) leverages cryptographic techniques, blockchain technology, and standardized protocols to provide enhanced security, user control, and trustworthy data sharing.
- Blockchain-based SSI systems offer innovative solutions but also encounter challenges, including potential vulnerabilities in the underlying blockchain network, scalability concerns, and the need to comply with privacy regulations.
- For blockchain-based SSI systems to achieve security, trustworthiness, and widespread adoption in the future, it's crucial to tackle the existing challenges.
```

## Introduction
Blockchain technology is disrupting society by enabling new types of disintermediated digital platforms. One of the most promising use cases of blockchain technology is SSI. Currently, blockchain technology is widely used to implement SSI management systems. However, several studies have suggested that these implementations face various challenges. In this article, we provide an overview of the challenges associated with blockchain-based SSI systems.

## Building blocks of SSI
SSI is a new paradigm that puts individuals in full control of their personal data, allowing them to determine when and how it is shared with others. Unlike traditional identity systems, SSI eliminates the need for a central authority to hold and disseminate data upon request. Instead, individuals can independently present identity claims. These claims and credentials can be verified with cryptographic certainty. This shift in identity management is facilitated by cryptographic techniques, distributed ledger technology, and standardized protocols {cite}`vcuvcko2021decentralized`. Within this model, the identity *holder* retains ownership of their identity information and credentials, while *issuers* are responsible for issuing Verifiable Credentials (VCs) {cite}`VCs`, tamper-proof digital credentials, to holders. *Verifiers*, in turn, rely on these VCs to authenticate and validate the presented identity as shown in [{numref}`ssi-model`]. This model enables individuals to securely exchange credentials with verifiers, establishing trust and facilitating a wide range of digital interactions without the need for centralized intermediaries.

```{figure} images/SSI_model.png
---
width: 550px
height: 300px
name: ssi-model
---
SSI architecture
```
### Decentralized identifier
Various identifier schemes exist, such as the International Standard Book Number (ISBN), the Global Trade Item Number, and the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). All of these examples require a central registry to issue and maintain the identifiers. SSI systems utilize the emerging scheme called Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) {cite}`DIDs`. These DIDs are standardized by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and offer a novel approach to identification in a decentralized way within the SSI framework. 
### DID document
DIDs are resolvable to DID documents which contain additional information associated with a particular DID such as cryptographic public keys and authentication suites. Additionally, the document may include service endpoints that describe how to reach the DID subject and establish trusted communication channels. Organizations seeking public visibility can create public DIDs. The corresponding DID documents can be stored directly in a Verifiable Data Registry (VDR), such as a blockchain. 
### Verifiable data registry
A VDR is a system designed to store DIDs and provide the necessary data to generate DID documents. VDRs can take various forms, including blockchains, decentralized file systems, databases, peer-to-peer networks, and other trusted data storage solutions {cite}`preukschat2021self`. To establish technical trust and facilitate interactions between entities, public DIDs and their corresponding DID documents must be stored in a VDR. For instance, the Ethereum blockchain network can be used to resolve DIDs using the [did:ethr method](https://github.com/uport-project/ethr-did). Blockchain technology offers desirable properties such as verifiability, availability, and immutability, which align with the requirements of public DIDs and DID documents, thereby contributing to the establishment of technical trust. However, blockchains are not the only option for serving as DID anchors. Alternative approaches exist, including the [Key Event Receipt Infrastructure (KERI)](https://keri.one/), [web servers](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-method-web/), the [Interplanetary File System (IPFS)](https://ipfs.tech/), and even Public Key Infrastructures (PKIs). However, in this article, we delve into the current academic landscape surrounding blockchain-based SSI systems and summarize the open challenges.

## Challenges
### Vulnerabilities in blockchain networks
Many existing SSI systems leverage various public blockchain networks, including [Bitcoin](https://identity.foundation/ion/), [Ethereum](https://ethereum.org/en/decentralized-identity/), and [Polygon](https://polygon.technology/polygon-id), to facilitate a VDR. While blockchain technology offers decentralized and transparent services for digital identity management, it is crucial to address the security risks and challenges associated with this innovative approach. Ahmed et al. {cite}`ahmed2022blockchain` highlighted the significance of potential vulnerabilities within the underlying blockchain network, which could lead to unforeseen attacks and compromise the overall security and privacy of SSI systems. Therefore, it is essential to conduct systematic investigations into adversarial methods that can undermine the blockchain network and, subsequently, the SSI system. In academic literature, researchers extensively discuss various attacks, such as majority attacks, Sybil attacks, replay attacks, and collusion attacks, that have the potential to undermine the integrity and security of blockchain networks in general {cite}`islam2021review`.
### Scalability of identity network
Scalability is a critical aspect to consider in the design and implementation of SSI systems. As the adoption and usage of SSI systems continue to grow, the ability to handle increased user demand and accommodate a larger network of participants becomes paramount. According to Pohn et al. {cite}`pohn2020overview`, scalability plays a pivotal role in the success of digital identity systems by directly influencing the system's capacity to provide timely and efficient identity management services. Many SSI systems leverage blockchain technology as a foundation for a new trust model that establishes immutable records linking decentralized identifiers to their owners. However, for blockchain-based SSI to gain widespread acceptance as a digital identity management system, the underlying blockchain infrastructure must demonstrate scalability, especially in terms of transaction throughput. The scalability challenge becomes evident when considering public permissionless blockchains like Ethereum, which are commonly used in many decentralized identity systems. These blockchain systems employ complex consensus mechanisms, making it challenging to accommodate a large user base and a high number of transactions, at least for now. While private blockchains, which are typically more centralized, can handle larger numbers of users and transactions more efficiently, they might compromise security to achieve this scalability {cite}`mivsic2022scalable, liu2020design`.
### Compliance with privacy laws
The characteristics of blockchain, such as data immutability and public ledger storage, raise concerns regarding compliance with data protection and privacy laws, including the [General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)](https://gdpr-info.eu/) of the European Union. One of the most challenging aspects of compliance for blockchain-based SSI systems is the right to erasure, also known as the right to be forgotten (Art. 17 GDPR) {cite}`kondova2020self`. When the data subject is also the controller — a person or entity that determines the purposes and means of processing personal data — the right to erasure might not apply. Likewise, the right to erasure might not apply if the controller has a valid reason for retaining the personal data. Data related solely to credential issuing institutions typically do not qualify as personal data. However, when DIDs, credential hashes, or revocation hashes are stored on a blockchain, a case-by-case analysis is necessary to determine if a specific entry qualifies as personal data. For instance, a hash value previously considered personal data might no longer be viewed as such if the hashed object has been securely deleted {cite}`giannopoulou2020data, mahula2021blockchain`. It's essential to conduct comprehensive assessments and evaluations to ensure compliance with privacy laws while harnessing the advantages of blockchain technology in SSI systems.
### Limitations of blockchain-based DID methods
A DID method serves as the mechanism through which a specific type of DID is created, resolved, updated, and revoked, along with its associated DID document. Currently, numerous DID methods exist, each offering distinct features and capabilities {cite}`fdhila2021methods`. All DID methods rely on a root of trust as a starting point for proving the chain of trust based on a public/private key pair {cite}`dunphy2022note`. Although the key pair is typically generated in secure hardware using a long random number, most DID methods do not rely solely on this root of trust (they are not self-certifying). Instead, they require a second step: using the private key to digitally sign a transaction on a blockchain to "record" the DID and the initial associated public key. Once that record is established, the blockchain becomes the algorithmic root of trust for the DID {cite}`avellaneda2019decentralized`. This means verifiers must check the blockchain to verify the current public key and any other contents of the DID document associated with the DID. As of early 2023, 95\% of the over 150 DID methods registered in the W3C DID Specification Registry {cite}`Steele2023` utilize blockchain-based DID methods. However, these DID methods present certain challenges and open issues:
- Dependency on another party or network: Although the ultimate root of trust remains the key pair used to generate the DID and update the DID document on the blockchain, a blockchain-based DID method requires a DID controller to depend on a blockchain and its associated governance mechanisms for trustworthiness {cite}`lux2020distributed`.
- Non-portability: Blockchain-based DIDs are "locked" to a specific blockchain and cannot be transferred if issues arise with the blockchain, its governance, or if the DID controller wishes to employ other DID methods {cite}`kubach2020self`.

## Conclusion
The emergence of SSI represents a promising paradigm shift in the digital identity landscape, aiming to return control and autonomy to users. This research has delved deeply into the SSI ecosystem, offering critical insights into the challenges surrounding blockchain-based implementations. Addressing these challenges is paramount to ensuring the security, trustworthiness, and widespread adoption of SSI systems in the future.

<div style="text-align: right;font-weight: bold;">Abylay Satybaldy</div>
<div style="text-align: right;font-style: italic;">September 2023</div>

## References

```{bibliography}
:filter: docname in docnames
```
